[Music]
hello everyone
Chapter seven today artificial
creativity now this is a chapter I
really have been looking forward to
possibly more than most I said all the
way back when I started doing these with
chapter 1 the one purpose of this was
actually not only to help others to
understand what was being said in
various places in the beginning of
infinity but also to clarify in my own
mind some of the more subtle arguments
being made and in this chapter there is
to my mind anyway some very subtle yet
powerful arguments being made I feel you
admit upfront and this is kind of
exciting
I actually didn't understand a large
part of the chapter until last year I
had to read it read it again just and
discuss it to really figure out why why
I wasn't quite getting some of what was
going on here I'll get to exactly what
that was that I didn't understand but
let me just preface it by saying I
thought that we by we I mean a
civilization community of scientists and
myself personally I thought we
understood evolution by natural
selection I mean I thought there was
this odd open question here or there but
I didn't think that in biology that
evolution by natural selection
neo-darwinism was anything unlike
general relativity I thought they were
you know as general relativity was to
physics the evolution by natural
selection was to biology but no this is
quite wrong so it's wrong philosophical
reasons but it's also wrong for the
reason that we don't understand
evolution by natural selection to quite
the degree that we understand general
relativity so in there's a way to know
that we don't understand one compared to
the other there's actually a rule and
and David articulates the rule in this
very chapter yet another one of his
discoveries there's a way of
distinguishing between things we truly
do have a good grasp of like how
planetary orbits work access theory of
general relativity and how evolution by
natural selection works
that's neo-darwinism there's a
difference to how well we understand
these two theories it's not the same so
again the way that we know that we
understand one really well and the way
that we know we don't understand one
really well there's a there's a good way
of dividing or separating these two
kinds of understanding which David's
going to present in this chapter now it
strikes me often in this book that
entire paragraphs had a a PhD students
say thought of them first they probably
could have extended them out to 40,000
plus words in writing a thesis all on
their own and earned their PhD on the
basis of some of the discoveries that
are published in this book for example
David's answer to what is a person could
certainly be a paper and a philosophical
journal all on its own as could the
answer to how do we know when we've
understood a process these are answers
to deep philosophical questions and they
come at you one after another in the
beginning of infinity and we will see
that in this chapter especially and
without laboring the point too much it's
another ongoing reason for this video
series and the podcasts now although
this chapter is not one of the longest
chapters indeed it's equally the second
shortest I'm doing this one in two parts
because I see a reasonably sharp
dividing line between a section on
artificial intelligence or more
precisely these days we call it
artificial general intelligence and the
second half of the chapter which is more
about artificial evolution I'll still
make remarks about the second part in
this first part but just to flag here
that I won't be at the end of the
chapter by the end of this episode okay
so let's get into it
chapter 7 and David writes Alan Turing
founded the theory of classical
computation in 1936 and helped construct
one of the first universal classical
computers during the Second World War he
is rightly known as the father of modern
computing Babbage deserves to be called
its grandfather
but unlike Babbage and Lovelace cheering
did understand that artificial
intelligence AI must in principle be
possible because a universal computer is
a universal simulator I'll pause there
and if it's just my commentary Universal
simulator now why is that important well
in this chapter when day
as AIA as I've already said he's using
what at once meant but now that meaning
is kind of being perverted in various
ways namely all the computer programs
are called that are called artificial
intelligence today they're not
intelligent a self-driving car is not an
example of anything like intelligence
what it's an example of is some very
fancy very specific highly specific
programming running on extremely fast
and sensitive hardware but it's not an
explanation producing machine as we are
that's why we're intelligent we're kind
of ahead of ourselves here but the point
is and david has written about this
elsewhere if you simply do a google
search of david deutsch hang-on magazine
that's a om and the title of the article
we're looking for is how close are we to
creating artificial intelligence then
you'll find something of an update on
this he wrote that article in 2012 so
four years after the publication of the
beginning of infinity and in it David
explains how AI has become kind of a
redundant turn since we now use AGI the
G standing for general artificial
general intelligence to differentiate
machines that can think in ways like
weekend so the point here about the
universal Turing machine is that it is a
universal simulator which means it can
simulate any process whatsoever
including simulating what a human brain
does and in that case the simulation
would be that thing a simulated mind is
a mind because they are both abstract
things now this is quite different to
say simulating a bullet in a computer
game a bullet has a very real physical
presence and a lack of abstraction of
the first kind in stark contrast to a
mind a simulated bullet won't kill you
in the real world but minds are already
abstract things running on physical
brain so simulating a mind on a silicon
brain let's say is to create an actual
mind okay back to the book now and David
writes in 1950 in a paper entitled
Computing Machinery and intelligence he
Turing famously addressed the question
can a machine think not only did he is
not only did he defend the property
from that it can on the grounds of
universality he also proposed the test
for whether a program had achieved it
now known as the Turing test it is
simply that a suitable human judge will
be unable to tell whether a program is
human or not in that paper and
subsequently during sketched protocols
for carrying out his test for instance
he suggested that both the program and a
genuine human should separately interact
with the judge via some purely textual
medium such as a telly printer so that
only the thinking abilities of the
candidates would be tested not their
appearance Turing's test and his
arguments set many researchers thinking
not only about whether he was right but
also about how to pass the test programs
began to be written with the intention
of investigating what might be involved
in passing it in 1964 the computer
scientist Joseph Weizenbaum wrote a
program called Eliza designed to imitate
a psychotherapist he deemed
psychotherapists to be an especially
easy type of human to imitate because
the program could then then give opaque
answers about itself and only ask
questions based on the users own
questions and statements it was a
remarkably simple program nowadays such
programs are popular projects for
students of programming because they are
fun and easy to write a typical one has
two basic strategies first it scans the
input for certain keywords and
grammatical forms if this is successful
it replies based on a template filling
in the blanks using words in the input
for instance given the input I hate my
job the program might recognize the
grammar of the sentence involving a
possessive pronoun my and might also
recognize hate as a keyword from a
built-in list such as love hate like
dislike want in which case I could
choose a suitable template and reply it
might reply what do you most like about
your job if it could not pass the input
to that extent it asks a question of its
own choosing randomly from a stock
pattern which may or may not depend on
the input sentence for instance if asked
how does a television work it might
reply what is so interesting about how
to still do in work I don't want asked
why does it interest you another
strategy used by recent internet-based
versions of Eliza is to build up a
database of previous conversations
enabling a program to repeat phrases
that other users have typed in again
choosing them according to keywords
found in the current users input now I
remember it and I just paused I remember
in high school myself writing a program
there was basically a personality
evaluator this was a silly thing back
when I was sort of a teenager and the
user would type in you know would ask
questions like what is your age what is
your gender what do you like doing on
the weekend out of a multiple-choice
list kind of thing would you prefer and
at the end would spit back at you what
your personality is like
and people were unaccountably impressed
by how well it was able to assess their
personality of course this is kind of
true of all psyche this has
psychological personality tests they
basically did the same thing I was doing
them when I was a teenager but people
are being paid lots of money to do this
sort of things today as far as I can so
basically they're a kind of chat bot
it's it's a program telling you
something about yourself just feeding
back stock responses there's nothing
intelligent behind it back to the book
and David writes Weizenbaum was shocked
that many people using Eliza were fooled
by it so it had passed the Turing test
at least in its most naive version
moreover even after people have been
taught it was not a genuine AI that
would sometimes continue to have long
conversations with it about their
personal problems exactly as though they
believed that he don't have understood
them wiesen Baum wrote a book computer
power and human reason 1976 warning of
the dangers of anthropomorphism when
computers seem to exhibit human-like
functionality however anthropomorphism
is not the main type of overconfidence
that has beset the field of AI for
example in 1983 Douglas Hofstadter was
subjected to a friendly hoax by some
graduate students they convinced him
that they had obtained access to a
government-run AI program and invited
him to apply the Turing test to it in
reality one of the students was at the
other end of the line imitating an
analyzer program as Hofstadter relates
in his book meta magical themers the
student was from the outset displaying
an implausible degree of understanding
of HA status questions now I won't read
the entire anecdote here about what
happened to Douglas Hofstadter with the
prank that was played on him but suffice
it to say as he himself says
he himself says he was willing to
concede that the program had way more
intelligence than what actually did and
he probably should have been more
critical earlier on a little bit more
skeptical about whether or not there was
actually an intelligence behind this
thing because of course there was there
was an actual person there and so what
is the best explanation what is the best
explanation if you kind of have a good
idea about what the current state of
chatbots are or of AI is if you're
interacting with the computer and it
comes back at you with a fleet
free-flowing conversation do you assume
the computer is intelligent or if it's
purporting to be the computer that's
intelligent to assume that that's an
honest claim or that there's actually a
person there are namely a human person
sorry there's a human person behind all
that rather than just a a genuine
artificial general intelligence well at
the moment we should always presume that
there's some prank being played but
there's a way to know whether or not
there isn't a prank being played which
we will come to soon so I'm skipping a
bit here and then David writes programs
written today a further 26 years later
are still no better at the task of
sending to think then Eliza was they are
now known as chat BOTS and their main
application is still amusement both
directly ending computer games they've
also been used to provide friendly
seeming interfaces to lists of
frequently asked questions about
subjects like how to operate computers
but I think that users still find them
no more helpful than a searchable list
of questions and answers so it's a
further 37 years later now 10 11 years
after this was written and we now have
Siri and various clones of Siri that
Samsung has come up with and Google and
others and what's the best that we can
say about Siri not many people really
like it there are some narrow
applications for which it tends to be
useful but in fact what David says there
where he says I think that users find
them no more helpful than a searchable
list of the questions and answers' is
exactly true and in fact people I think
tend to prefer typing a question into
Google than they do asking Siri what the
answer is because the voice recognition
just isn't up to it for still in the
year 2019 it provides some funny answers
where it does comprehend the words so it
gets the words right it doesn't
understand the meaning behind the
question being asked and so can
sometimes give very funny answers let's
continue with the book and David writes
in 1990 the inventor huge Loebner
endowed a prize for passing the Turing
test to be judged and an annual
competition until the test is passed a
less surprises awarded each year for the
entry judge to be closest to passing the
test is harder to implement that may
first seem one issue is requiring the
program to pretend to be a human is both
biased not very relevant to whether it
can think yet if it does not pretend to
be human it will be easy to identify as
a computer regardless of its ability to
think
a related difficulty is that the human
participant in the test might
intentionally imitate a chatbot as in
the Hostetter hoax and so spoil the test
which is based on comparing the two
should the rules nevertheless allow the
human to do this in order to mitigate
the previous problem unfortunately such
subtleties are not relevant to the
current state of the art this is will
illustrated by the following excerpts
from the conversation with which the
program l bot won the lesser Loebner
prize in 2008 judge do you understand
the point of a Turing test l bot there
are some people who would not pass the
Turing test themselves why must they
inflicted on computers judge I suppose
it is a little harsh l but if we robots
ever had marriages there would be
eternal - Russ to us part now in that
passage l bots first utterance is not to
reply to the question but presumably a
stock response triggered by the key
words Turing test in the following line
that judge uses the word suppose which
in that context can only mean supposed
either a slang or as a typographical
error but L BOTS presumably interpreted
as spouse and responds with a stock joke
about marriage hence even from this
exchange alone it is clear that L bot
was not processing the meaning
of the judge sentences David returns to
the conversation judge so what do you do
when you're not chatting to me then
pillbot I the same trouble when I shop
for oil should I buy the extra oil
either super oily or the ultra oily
there's nowhere to tell judge how about
your career does that involve oil L bot
well what about humans and occupation
where do they stand on this when the
judge helpfully took up L BOTS randomly
introduced theme of oil L bot ignored it
instead of having detected the keyword
curry it converted it to the synonym
occupation and inserted it into our
stock sentence pattern this is how much
success the quest for machines that
think had achieved in the 58 years
following shrinks paper nil okay so this
is my commentary now at the moment on
social media there's this thing going
around called the ten year challenge
which basically consists of posting a
photo of yourself ten years ago and one
today and having a look at the
difference so we could do that with the
state of IL we could compare what it was
like ten years ago and we will see that
it's no different today and in fact it's
no different to the ten years before
that or the ten years before that or in
fact going back
according to David's calculations it
would be it'll be 69 years now since
rings first paper how much progress has
been made
nil okay so let's go through the 2018
lesser Loebner prize winner the things
start off will but as we'll see towards
the end at about line 13 there's a
simple mathematical question which any
person with any passing familiarity with
simple geometry could probably get
correct and indeed I would guess that
Wolfram Alpha online could probably get
it correct but the chatbot can't do it
so let's read let's read out a little
bit of this so the winner in 2018 was so
the website here tells me MIT suku
Mitsouko was written by a Steve Wars
week now a conversation starts off
reasonably well and then we get down to
now we get down to line 12 where the
judge says what will you do later today
and Mitsuko says ah I don't have any
plans yet now for that question answer
two points are scored which I guess is
the the maximum and you get zero if it's
pretty clear that you haven't understood
the question that was asked or the
statement was made line 13 the judge
says what is the third angle in a
triangle with internal angles of 90
degrees and 30 degrees and mid suku the
chatbot responds earth is the third
planet so what's going on there if you
have passing familiarity with with
geometry then you'll know that triangles
have an internal angle summer of 180
degrees we've got 90 we've got 30 that
leaves 60 the answer is 60 but the
chatbot has just read the stem of the
question what is the third and as
immediately inserted a stock response
earth is the third planet that hasn't
bothered with the rest of it if we go
down to line 15 the judge says what do
you hold when you shake hands and the
chatbot responds I think about computer
programming a lot
okay so again couldn't pass the question
at all just looked at the stem what do
you and presumably as inserted well what
I do is I do computer programming a lot
and then let's just go to let's just go
to the last line and the judge asks kind
of a question about comprehension it's
almost a riddle not really pushes the
point about comprehension here and the
judge asked the question or makes the
claim the judge says the judge says I
had to go to the toilet during the film
because it was too long what was too
long and the chat bot responds was it
worth going to is that your opinion
measuring much from end to end in space
or from beginning to end in time not
short or brief so what's it worth going
to be
so so the chatbot didn't understand the
chat the chat butters asked the question
about was it worth going to namely the
toilet was it worth going to the toilet
and was it too long and then the chat
box gets into this ridiculous
philosophical question about time so
again no progress towards chat bots that
actually think in the year 2018
this was okay so going back to the book
and David has just said 58 years
following Turing's paper neil progress
is being made on machines that think and
he writes yet in every other respect
computer science and technology had made
astounding progress during that period
the dwindling group of opponents of the
very possibility of a iron no doubt
unsurprised by this failure for the
wrong reason they do not appreciate the
significance of universality
but the passionate enthusiasts for the
imminence of a Ides are not appreciated
the ceilings of the failure some claim
that the above criticism is unfair
modern AI research has not focused on
passing the Turing test and great
progress has been made in what is now
called AI in many specialized
applications however now those
applications look like machines that
think others maintain the criticism is
premature because during most of the
history of the field computers had
absurdly little speed and memory
capacity compared with today's hence
they continue to expect a breakthrough
in the next few years this will not do
either it is not as though someone has
written a chatbot that could pass the
Turing test but would currently take a
year to compute each reply people would
gladly wait and in any case if anyone
knew how to write such a program
there'll be no need to wait for reasons
that I should get to shortly in his 1950
paper cheering estimated that to pass
his test and IO program together with
all of its data would require no more
than about a hundred megabytes of memory
that the computer would need to be no
faster than computers were at the time
about 10,000 operations per second and
the by the year 2001 we'll be able to
speak of machines thinking without
expecting to be contradicted the year
2000 has come and gone and the laptop
computer on which I am writing this book
has over a thousand times as much memory
as cheering specified counting hard
drive space and about a million times of
speed though it is not clear from his
paper
what account he was taking of the brains
parallel processing but it could no more
think than shirring slide-rule could I
am just as sure assuring that it could
be programmed to think and this might
indeed requires few resources assuring
estimated even though orders of
magnitude more available today but with
what program and why is there no sign of
such a program intelligence in the
general-purpose sense that shearing
meant is one of a constellation of
attributes of the human mind that have
been puzzling philosophers for millennia
others include consciousness freewill
and meaning a typical such puzzle is
that of qualia singular cuale which
rhymes with barley
meaning the subjective aspect of
sensations so for instance the sensation
have seen the color blue is a koala
consider the following thought
experiment and I'll just don't pause
there what David is going to provide
here is a version of what is known as
Mary's room it's a thought experiment
and the example first appears in an
article by someone called Frank Jackson
in a it's called the title of the
article is called epi phenomenal qualia
which appears in philosophical quarterly
in a 1982 addition I think volume 32 you
can find videos and articles online all
about it
I'll keep reading here though and so
here's the thought experiment david's
version quote you are a biochemist with
a misfortune you are born with a genetic
defect that disables the blue receptors
in your retinas consequently you have a
form of color blindness in which you are
able to see only red and green and
mixtures of the two such as yellow but
anything purely blue also looks to you
like one of those mixtures then you
discover a cure that will cause your
blue receptors to start working before
administering the cure to yourself you
can confidently make certain predictions
about what will happen if it works one
of them is that when you hold up a blue
card as a test you will see a color that
you have never seen before you can
predict that you will call it blue
because you already know what the color
of the card is called
and can already check which color it is
with a spectrophotometer you can also
predict that when you will first see a
clear daytime sky after being cured you
experience a similar koala to that of
seeing the blue card but there is one
thing that neither you nor anyone else
could predict about the outcome of this
experiment and that is what blue will
look like qualia are currently neither
describable nor predictable
an unique property that should make them
deeply problematic to anyone with a
scientific worldview though in the event
it seems to be mainly philosophers and
worry about it I consider this exciting
evidence that there is a fundamental
discovery to be made which will
integrate things like qualia into our
other knowledge Daniel Dennett across
the opposite conclusion namely the
qualia did not exist his claim is not
strictly speaking fair an illusion for
an illusion of a koala would be that
koala it is that we have a mistaken
belief our introspection which is an
inspection of memories of our
experiences including memories dating
back only a fraction of a second has
evolved to report that we have
experienced qualia but those are false
memories
one of Dennett's books defending this
theory is called consciousness explained
other philosophers of riley remark that
consciousness denied would be a more
accurate now I agree because although
any true explanation of qualia will have
to meet the challenge of Dennett's
criticisms of the common sense theory
that they exist simply to deny their
existence as a banned explanation
anything at all could be denied by that
method if it is true it will have to be
substantiated by a good explanation of
how and why those mistaken beliefs seem
fundamentally different from other false
beliefs such as that the earth is at
rest beneath our feet but that looks to
me just like the original problem of
qualia again we seem to have them it
seems impossible to describe what they
seem to be that's an amazing line so
let's just read it again in terms of
qualia we seem to have them it seems
impossible to describe what they seem to
be and it continues one day we shall
problems are soluble so pause there so
while you're a fundamental mystery why
do certain wider sensations have a
subjective aspect to them at all we
don't understand it because if we could
understand it well
we're going to get to a way in which we
know whether or not we understand
something but we do not understand
qualia we don't have a good hard to very
explanation of what they are let me
continue with the book by the way some
abilities of humans that are commonly
included in that constellation
associated with general purpose
intelligence do not belong in it one of
them is self-awareness as evidenced by
such tests as recognizing oneself in a
mirror
some people are unaccountably impressed
when various animals are shown to have
that ability but there is nothing
mysterious about it a simple pattern
recognition program or conferred on a
computer pause there yes there and as we
already are very familiar with in the
year 2019 phones can recognize faces the
same technology that allows an iPhone to
recognize your face or any of the facial
recognition software that it's out there
now there's heaps of it you go through
an airport I know I come through
immigration and the Machine recognizes
my face and competitor my passport and
lets me through it would be very easy to
program an iPhone to recognize itself so
we are very good at that now computers
can recognize themselves that does not
mean they have some sort of intelligence
okay the year the iPhone is not
self-aware just because it can recognize
its own shape so back to the book and
Davis just finished talking about
pattern recognition and recognizing
faces in other words self-awareness he
writes the same is true of Tullius the
use of language for signaling by not for
conversation in the Turing test sense
and various emotional responses they're
not the associated qualia at the present
state of the field a useful rule of
thumb is if it can already be programmed
it has nothing to do with intelligence
in the cheering sense conversely I have
settled on a simple test for judging
claims including Dennett's
to have explained the nature of
consciousness or any other computational
task if you can't program it you haven't
understood it
I'll pause there and now this is
probably worth reading six times and I
wish this would enter the zeitgeist as
well this is another philosophical
discovery a hidden gem so to speak which
I'm sure many people who've read the
book just gloss over or notice that
there think it's interesting but this is
really really profound
if you can't program it you haven't
understood it a program is an algorithm
it's a set of steps and so if you can
write down that set of steps in order to
reproduce the thing that you claim to
understand then you've really understood
it because you're able to replicate that
thing you're able to simulate that thing
using a computer but if you can't run an
algorithm down a sequence of steps a
sequence of instructions then you do not
understand that thing if you can't get a
computer to replicate it then you
haven't understood it we understand
Newtonian mechanics one of the things I
did as a graduate student was to collide
galaxies together in a simulation
there's purely in a simulation we know
what happens when galaxies collide
together because you can take the
physical laws that govern the motion of
galaxies namely the laws of gravity and
various thermodynamic laws and you can
replicate a couple of galaxies and have
them crash together and then what they
end up looking like afterwards kind of
resembles what you see out there in
space when you compare the simulation to
observation the images look similar and
so this is kind of a an attempt to
refute the theoretical model that you've
got okay by using an observation we
understand how galaxy collisions work we
understand how orbits work when planets
go around stars because we know what the
laws of physics are and you can program
a computer to rep to simulate what's
going on we understand perfectly well
how the planets orbit the Sun
because we can predict millions of years
ahead when the next Eclipse or alignment
will be what the position of Jupiter
would be at any point in the future
modular the humans taking over the solar
system at some point in deciding to
control the trajectory of Jupiter around
the Sun but I hope you get what I'm
saying here
physics is kind of this area where we
can definitely program our computers in
order to simulate various physical
systems but when people claim that they
have an understanding of something like
consciousness we can test that claim in
the same way we can test whether or not
they have an understanding of a physical
process of any other physical process in
physics namely by programming a computer
with their with their theory I've had
people over the last few years say to me
I understand consciousness and I've got
a theory of consciousness great can you
write a program for it so that the
computer can be conscious and then can
we test that No so far no no one's been
able to do that now related to this
there's also this vision that some
people have of artificial intelligence
that it's something like a list of all
the possible things that people can do
now I've heard Sam Harris make
explicitly this point I'm not sure if he
gets it from Nick Bostrom or or
elsewhere but if there's anything like
prevailing view on these things I guess
that this is it their argument goes like
this
right now there are computers out there
that are better at people at playing
chess and doing simple arithmetic and
there's already computers out there that
are better than people at driving okay
now all we need to do is to extrapolate
out to every possible task just keep
writing programs for everything a person
can do so now maybe not too far in the
future we'll have programs for robotic
AI that can bake cakes and can be your
tango dancing partner it can solve
chemical equations another one will be
good at ironing a shirt another one we
got it chasing a person firing a gun and
turning off the electricity just keep on
writing programs
in order to accomplish every single task
that humans can currently do and so the
argument goes you will have exhausted
all the possible things that people can
do or that people do to and the thing is
you now have a super intelligence on
this argument because if a robot did
indeed have all of these capabilities
they would by definition being a super
being because they can do everything a
person can but they now also have super
fast robot reflexes and thinking there
are super intelligence and thus they're
super dangerous because they'd be way
better at people than anything else and
I think this is very very wrong
fundamentally wrong it doesn't matter
how long your list is the list will
always be finite and it will never be
able to accommodate something that's not
in the list and so if let's say such an
AI became an evil AI all you would need
to do is to look up the program and then
to give it a task or to attempt to do
something to it that's not in that list
and you could do that because you are a
creative thinker but that AI has a
finite list of things that it can do and
you can always get around a finite list
by just finding something else on the
list or creating something new that's
not in the list a person is creative but
that kind of robot never will be it is
programmed only with the stuff the
program is no it cannot possibly solve
stuff not in its programming for none of
those programs are about creating
knowledge and that is the key
general-purpose problem solving is what
a person is all about a person is a
general-purpose problem solver a person
has a potentially infinite number of
problems they can tackle but this robots
list is however large always finite and
it will always remain finite that is the
qualitative difference and actually
finite list of things that this suppose
it's super intelligent hey I can do
versus the unbounded potential of an
actual person an actual creative person
now back to the book chewing invented
his test and a hope of bypassing all
those philosophical problems in other
words he hoped that the functionality
could be achieved before it was
explained unfortunately it is very rare
for practical solutions to fundamental
problems to be discovered without any
explanation of why they work I'll just
pause there so this brings us to one of
the deep themes of the beginning of
infinity it is very rare as he said just
there to ever have a solution to a
problem and you don't know why it's a
solution to a problem now it perhaps
used to be or seemed to be common in the
past in medicine for example they used
to be treatments for things that no one
knew why they worked and that still
happens today but it's the rare
exception to the rule now it used to be
very common in the past because we
didn't understand anything in the past
there was very little that we understood
but the more and more that we understand
the less and less we have these
solutions for which we have no
explanation as to why they work so I
don't know think of any treatment
usually you know some of these strange
things that come out of the Amazon
rainforest that happen to work to cure
headaches or to treat some other kind of
disease okay that's the rare exception
these days certainly today many many
medicines are derived from some kind of
extract from an a plant but we usually
know what the chemical is what the
active ingredient is today really we
don't and that's just in medicine I mean
I've never heard of anything in physics
where we've got a solution to a problem
for which we don't have an explanation
and that's par excellence the reason for
physics is to try and provide what we
know this from the beginning and fitting
in fabric reality that's the reason for
physics ok so back to the book David
writes nevertheless rather like
empiricism which it resembles the idea
of the Turing test has played a valuable
role it has provided a focus for
explaining the significance of
universality and for criticizing the
ancient anthropocentric assumptions that
would rule out the possibility of AI
true himself systematically refuted all
the classic objections in that seminal
paper and some absurd ones for good
measure
but his test is rooted in the appear
system the sake of seeking
behavioural criterion it requires the
judge to come to a conclusion without
any expression of how the candidate is
supposed to work but in reality judging
whether something is a genuine AI or
will always depend on explanations of
how it works this is because the task of
the judge in assuring tests has a
similar logic to that face by Paley when
walking across his Heath and finding a
stone a watch or a living organism it is
to explain how the observable features
in the object came about in the case of
the cheering test we deliberately ignore
the issue of how the knowledge to design
the object was created the test is only
about who designed the eye is a Durance
who adapted its utterances to be
meaningful who created the knowledge in
them if it was the designer then the
program is not an AI if it was the
program itself then it is an a-line so
I'll pause there and this is the
profound point in the entire chapter and
we'll have much more to say about this
in part 2 when it comes to artificial
evolution but the point here is with the
Turing tests we're not simply trying to
have a conversation with something such
that it's in such that we conclude then
it must be an artificial general
intelligence the point is that whatever
the utterances are if they appear to be
the utterances of some kind of
intelligence the purpose of the Turing
test should be to find out how those
utterances are being made why should it
remain a black box can you imagine if
someone entered that Loebner prize if
someone won it using a using a chat book
that was overwhelmingly convincing a
chat bot that was clearly an
intelligence of some sort
do we give do we award the prize the
Loebner prize the number one passed the
Turing test prize to that program but to
the writer of that program well it
depends what's our explanation for how
this thing has passed the Turing tests
or how this thing has won the prize is
it because it genuinely is an artificial
general intelligence is that one
possibility but today any reasonable
judge
or any person offering the prize would
either on the side that they're being
fooled they're being conned in some way
who knows how but that would be a better
explanation until they're shown the
program if they're shown the program
well then they you can be convinced that
either it genuinely is an artificial
general intelligence or not but as
David's about to say if that's the case
if they have a program you don't need to
worry about whether and it passes this
silly chat bot conversation or not
you'll have the program and the program
will convince anyone who understands how
to read the program ok so I'm going to
skip a couple of paragraphs here and
back to the book and David writes
without a good explanation of how an
entity's utterances were created
observing them tells us nothing about
that in the Turing test at its simplest
level we need to be convinced that the
utterances are not being directly
composed by a human masquerading as an
AI as in the Hostetter hoax but the
possibility of the hoax is the least of
it just pause there before I move on and
this again is a reason why the chewing
test cannot be a true scientific test of
intelligence it needs to be a way of
weeding out the hoaxes if it could do
that as good science fails then for
reasons David is about to come to you
wouldn't need the test in the first
place basically cause the writer of the
AGI the actually thinking chatbot would
have published the algorithm and that
would be way more convincing to people
in the field then passing the Turing
test which could always be thought of as
being a hoax so back to the book he just
said but the possibility of the hoax is
the least of it for instance I guess
that above that L Bhatt had recited a
stock joke in response to mistakenly
recognizing the keyword spouse but the
joke would have a quite different
significance if we knew that it was not
a stock joke because no such joke had
ever been encoded in the program how
could we know that only from a good
explanation for instance we might know
it because we ourselves wrote the
program another way it could be for the
author of the program to explain to us
how it works how it creates knowledge
including jokes if the explanation was
good we should know that the program was
an iron in fact if we had only such an
explanation but not yet seen any output
from the probe
and even if it had not yet been written
we would still conclude it was a genuine
AI program so there would be no need for
a Turing test that is why I said that if
lack of computer power the only thing
preventing the achievement of AI there
will be no need to wait explaining how
an AI program works in detail my will be
intractably complicated in practice the
author's explanation would always be at
some emergent abstract level but that
would not prevent it from being a good
explanation you would not have to
account for the specific computational
steps to compose the joke just as a
theory of evolution does not have to
account for why every specific mutation
succeeded or failed in the history of a
given adaptation it will just need to
explain how it could happen and why we
should expect it to happen given how the
program works if that were a good
explanation it would convince us that
the joke the knowledge in the jerk
originated in the program and not in the
programmer thus the very same utterance
by the program the joke can either be
evidenced that it is not thinking or
evidence that it is thinking depending
upon the best available explanation of
how the program works the nature of
humor is not well understood so we do
not know where the general-purpose
thinking is required to compose jokes so
it is conceivable that despite the wide
range of subject matter about wit about
which one can joke there are hidden
connections that reduce all joke making
to a single narrow function in that case
there could one day be general purpose
joke making machines that are not people
just as they're just as today there are
general-purpose chess-playing machines
that are not people it sounds
implausible but since we have no good
explanation ruling it out we could not
rely on joke making just as our only way
of judging an AI what we could do though
is have a conversation ranging over a
diverse range of topics and pay
attention to whether the program's
utterances were not adapted in the
meanings to the various purposes that
came up if the program really is
thinking then it is in the course of
such conversation it will explain itself
in one of countless unpredictable ways
just as you or I would just pause there
there it is there's the key the AI the
AGI program the artificial general
intelligence program handy enough of
June
official intelligence program it would
need to explain itself which means it
would need to create some knowledge
that's the key back to the book there is
a deeper issue to my abilities must have
some sort of universality special
purpose thinking will not count as
thinking in the sense
cheering intended my guess is that every
eye eye as a person a general-purpose
explainer and just pausing there this is
key
now David does say my guess is but
really what better explanation do we
have this link between knowledge and its
creation and people and their inherent
creativity thus linking people in their
moral significance to epistemology is
almost another book worthy statement
there's so much slam pack I'll do so in
a moment after I read just a little more
here and and I get what's being said
there about there might be general
purpose joke making programs that are
not people but in spur that wouldn't
mean that all possible sources of comedy
or jokes indeed might be produced by
such a general purpose joke making
machine
perhaps it would be general purpose
within a narrow range of kinds of jokes
maybe we will understand there are
certain species of jokes and all the
possible kinds of jokes within this
particular species could be written down
by this program but I imagine my guess
would be that you would have many
different forms of humor some of which
are jokes and some of which aren't of
course and that would require that would
require creativity and David writes in
it is conceivable that there are other
levels of universality between AI and
Universal explain a constructor and
perhaps separate levels for those
associated with attributes like
consciousness but those attributes all
seem to have arrived in one jump to
universality in humans and although we
have little explanation of any of them I
know of no plausible argument that they
are at different levels or can be
achieved independently of each other so
I tend to do we assume that they cannot
so I'll pause there for some more
lengthy commentary here so these are
their attributes like consciousness and
freewill possibly coming along for the
ride so to speak or they they could be
something like I sometimes think the
difference between observing something
from the outside and observing something
from the inside so what is a bat or that
demands a scientific answer what is it
like to be a bat well that's more
philosophical I think something here can
be said about people what is a person
well they're something like a creative
entity a general-purpose explainer what
is it like to be a person consciousness
so I guess that consciousness is
something like the subjective experience
of creative II now I'm diverging from
the beginning of infinity a little bit
here and so I'm not saying I'm I under
summarizing or explaining David's work
what I'm just going to do now is simply
extrapolate a little myself on top of
what David's done here and possibly make
lots of errors along the way but just
indulge me for a moment creativity of
the kind where people create
explanations or create knowledge is just
the outward manifestation of an inner
consciousness what it feels like to be
creative is consciousness
now consciousness is what we are it is
almost redundant to say we experience
consciousness it is more like we are
conscious or we are consciousness but
the consciousness the subjective
experience of the mind is something that
with effort we direct now some people
say that subjectively we do not control
the contents of our consciousness and
sam harris says that on introspection
you do not you do not have subjective
control over your thoughts they come and
go in the objective world out there I do
not control what happens fine it's all
quite uncontroversial and in my
subjective experience of that world
likewise the contents the blue sky the
sound of birds are also not in my
control and my next thought so it's
argued arises unbidden well indeed if
you switch off and meditate that does
indeed seem to be the case
parts of
consciousness mind decouple from other
parts the thoughts and the awareness of
those thoughts divided and one is
inclined to think I am NOT that stream
of thoughts this indeed is the inside of
contemplatives like Harris and many
others who follow in a Buddhist
tradition but of course that too is an
observation of the internal subjective
state and there's no more an indication
of deep subjective truth about the
nature of the person then I am my stream
of thoughts so when you're in a
contemplative state you can have this
sensation that you are not this stream
of thoughts and then when you're not in
a complementarity of state you can have
the experience of being a stream of
thoughts why is one a road to truth
while the other is not I'm yet to hear
an answer to that both the the lost in
thought state and as the buddhists or
sam harris would say the divested of
sense of self state they're both
subjective States Sam wants to call one
the true eye when the eye is lost
compared to the perpetually lost in
thought state what I want to say here is
that the subjective experience of the
lost in thought state is actually very
probative of what people are when you
are lost in thought or just thinking
your thinking without concern about who
you are you're in the flow state of
thinking one thought and then reasoning
and concluding what comes next
now I do indeed feel capable of deciding
thinking and deciding explaining I feel
actively involved in all choices I feel
a subjective sense of freewill this may
seem to be too clever by half but I want
to say that when paying attention to how
you think while lost in thought you can
see options arising being criticized and
either surviving the process or not and
this is key you can slow things down or
not and notice how critical you are
being or not now at this point the
freewill denial will say ah but you did
not choose to have the thought should
should I slow down and think more
carefully now or not that thought wasn't
given to you okay
I do not control all of my thoughts but
the choice to slow down or not is mine
sometimes I do and sometimes I don't and
not controlling all of the contents of
consciousness does not mean does not
mean I do not control some and my
conception of free will is only that I
control some and not all it is as if to
say because the state cannot control all
aspects of our lives
it controls none and hence does not
exist that would be absurd
the all-or-nothing conception of free
will here is get misguided so free will
is that sense that we choose to create
one explanation rather than than another
we attempt to create when a person
encounters a problem they seek to find
solutions seek implies the solutions are
out there in some sense but this is rare
usually there must come from within that
must be created by the mind the creative
mind of the individual outwardly we see
solutions generated by a person inwardly
we experience the phenomena of
consciousness as we encounter the world
and construct inside our minds a
representation of the outside reality
this act of construction is a creative
one we create that representation and
when there is a problem we attempt to
solve it or we can ignore the problem
these are our choices there are a
literally infinite number of problems we
might attempt to solve but and this is
the key we choose only some to work on
and this is the exercise of free will if
you have a major life decision should I
enter into university and study finance
or physics if you think on this
carefully over many months you might
think my mathematical skills are
reasonably good I could do either I like
to work with numbers and constrain
things quantitatively finance seems to
be interesting I could be wealthy and do
physics on side but then directly
working on fundamental problems might be
more rewarding than simply earning a
high wage I think and create options but
maybe I shouldn't worry maybe I
shouldn't care what I do and just not
think about it at all the choice to
think hard on this or not to decide
which knowledge to create the knowledge
about what to do
with my life or not is something I am
free to choose to do or not free will is
the freedom for me to get a good sense
of my preferences and to act upon them
that is to say choose but to know what
my preferences truly are let's say
finance or physics I need to carefully
deliberate solve that problem create
that knowledge outwardly eventually
someone will notice me enroll in physics
and finance as a double major but
inwardly only I know that I felt many
different things emotions like
excitement or confusion and the thrill
of making a new insight it was all me or
largely me that contemplated this
problem for hours on end I chose this
interesting solution the double degree
as it helped me satisfy both desires I
was free to do otherwise to not think
about it at all or to choose one over
the other but no I chose to do what I
did I did that but the laws of physics
inwardly it was a conscious sensation of
free will but outwardly it was a choice
made to create knowledge in that area
these things are all facets of the one
same phenomenon what it means to be a
human and explain the world so these
many different attributes that David
speaks about and he guesses that they
seem to have all come at once in a jump
to universality and maybe they are all
aspects of the same thing this is the
sense that I get as well I don't think
we have good had the very explanations
of any of these things freewill
creativity consciousness meaning so on
but the best that we do is what's
provided here in this chapter I would
suggest let's return to it let me
continue reading in any case we should
expect AI to be achieved in a jump to
universality starting from something
much less powerful in contrast the
ability to imitate a human imperfectly
or in specialized functions is not a
form of universality it can exist in
degrees hence even if chatbots did at
some point start becoming much better
than imitating humans or fooling humans
or at fooling humans that would still
not be a path to AI becoming better at
pretending to think is not the same as
coming closer to being able to think
there is a philosophy as basic
henan is that those are the same it's
called behaviorism which is instrumental
ISM applied to psychology it is a
doctrine that psychology can only or
should only be the science of behavior
not of minds that it can only measure
and predict relationships between
people's external circumstances similar
stimuli and there is a behavior
responses the latter years unfortunately
exactly how the Turing test asked the
judge to regard a candidate AI hence it
encouraged the attitude that if a
program could fake AI well enough it
would have achieved it but ultimately a
non AI program cannot fake AI the path
to our eye cannot be through ever better
tricks for making chatbots more
convincing a behaviorist would no doubt
ask what exactly is the difference
between giving a chatbot a very rich
repertoire of tricks templates and
databases and giving it a AI abilities
what is an AI program other than a
collection of such tricks and I'll pause
there in fact I'll stop the reading
there and move on to episode two but
just a remark on that last bit the bag
of tricks idea AI being a collection of
such tricks it's something that I
referenced earlier that AI is
essentially just a collection of
programs each of which can do one of the
things that people can and together I
can do all the things that people can in
some some distant future we'll have an
AI that can do all of that it will have
the comprehensive bag of human tricks it
can do all the things that a human can a
except for one the key one being won't
be able to create explanations because
if it's able to do that it doesn't need
any of the others as it turns out and
let me just explain a little bit more
here so I've written down a few notes
here and let me just read through those
so this idea that AI is essentially just
a collection of programs each of which
can do one of the things people can and
together can do all the things that
people can do except their silicon-based
robots so they can do them much faster
and with fewer errors the conclusion
follows almost unavoidably therefore
they the silicon based robots will be
better than humans more morally valuable
superhumans but that's false
they will never create anything new
because not one of their programs can do
what a person can do namely create or
rather if any of the programs could
create something completely new then
none of the other ones would be needed
either because that single program is a
knowledge creating program and so you
wouldn't have to preload it with all
these other things and you could preload
it with all these other things but what
would be the point because once the once
you load it with the artificial general
intelligence program it then is a person
and if you try and force any other kind
of learning onto it well that's coercion
that's saying here's what you need to
learn but what if you loaded all those
others and then you loaded the AGI
program same problem same problem giving
the AGI all of the knowledge that
perhaps it didn't want to know perhaps
it doesn't want to be the best Baker in
the world the thing about people is that
people humans and AGI they're Universal
explainers and david has answered the
question what is a person few of noticed
as recently as yesterday I was listening
to Sam Harris's podcasts a third time
I've mentioned Sam in this episode I
just saw just by the way because I think
he's got the best podcast and I think he
captures very well what the public
sentiment on many deep philosophical and
scientific issues are at the moment and
so it's a good way to get a handle on
what people are thinking about any
particular thing and so just yesterday
episode number 146 for the waking up
podcast it was called digital capitalism
and his interviewee was a Douglas
rushkoff and he was very concerned about
technology taking over yeah one a was a
little bit of a pessimist about aspects
of technology very well he's not alone
there and although there were the usual
noises about tech calamities he wanted
to say something in defense of humans
against computers he argued that the
singletery ins you know these these
people that think that we're all going
to be uploaded into the matrix at some
distant point some
make your point in the future and we'll
all have an immortal life based by
living in the Internet or something
other
that's the singular Terence the
singularity is coming and various other
kinds of transhumanist it's so this this
fellow Douglas rushkoff was saying that
these people are missing the crucial
qualities of people what the essence of
a person is if you like now I kind of
agree with him there but he thinks he
tried to articulate what he thought the
crucial qualities of humans are the
crucial qualities of people are and if
you're interested in listening that's
around the 43 minute and 20 second mark
and he he has a quiet strange list of
qualities that he thinks that humans
have the differentiate them from
computers and so that the words that he
mentioned there were or and meditation
and camaraderie and establishing rapport
it said it's a strange list but I sensed
more than the particular words that he's
used that it was struggling he was
struggling very much to pin down what it
is that's special about people as so
many philosophers and scientists have
over they know there's something there
and this is why people revert to
superstitious ideas that people have a
soul or a spirit or something like that
I can't quite apply a secular scientific
understanding to what is special about
human beings what makes them cosmically
significant and so they reach for these
other words that just don't resonate I
don't think with anyone who is listening
to that would have gone our Wow yes
that's exactly what a person is a person
a person special quality is camaraderie
and building a rapport it's missing
something it seems denuded of the the
key point there have been many of these
attempts over the years to try and
secularize what is almost sacred or
divine about people never failed the
truth is as we have learned people are
unique because they create explanatory
knowledge that's cosmically significant
it's cosmically significant in a way
that's greater than spirit or soul than
what the
religious or supernatural people say it
is saying that if we persevere in
solving problems in doing what we are as
people in creating we will change not
only the entire planet we will change
the galaxy in the universe that is our
capacity as general-purpose problem
solvers so yes so he was struggling very
much to pin down what it was that was
special about people and Sam Harris
himself likewise earlier in exactly the
same episode tried to articulate what he
thought was special about humans and he
said if anything is special about humans
it's our it's our use of language this
is the thing that differentiates us from
from computers or from but it doesn't
differentiate us from computers or
animals or anything else computers for
he much use language animals use
language so these attempts just miss the
the the key the key point it is people
creating explanations explanations that
can change the world as the subtitle of
the book is that's cosmically
significant tennis players can't put
into words are an in explicit
explanation of how to serve a great ace
a person who never learns to speak will
nonetheless still create explanations
language is a facet a small facet of
something far deeper and broader
languages of course necessary for social
interaction but it can't be the thing
that separates a humans rather things
computers do have languages and
satellites
so it's not language it is our capacity
as universal explainers or universal
knowledge creators or universal problem
solvers or general-purpose explainers
and so go the synonyms for this same
concept basically a thing that solves
problems by creating explanatory
knowledge but there is another kind of
knowledge that we haven't touched on in
this episode yet if we recall from
Chapter two biological knowledge and so
now here in Chapter seven David now
turns to how to attempt to artificially
simulate biological knowledge using
so-called evolutionary algorithms and
what the state of that particular
science or engineering is it's a whole
other episode in itself so I'm going to
leave what I've said here now and I'll
see you in the next
so bye for now
[Music]